After a difficult pre-production phase of nearly three years, in which it was difficult 
to even find a studio willing to invest in the movie, the time had come to start shooting 
Star Wars (as it was originally called). Cast and crew left the UK with not all the 
preparations finished, there were still problems with some costumes like C-3PO and the 
stormtroopers, and back in the US, ILM was struggling with the technology required for 
the special effects. It seemed that the cast and crew were in for a difficult shoot. 
This proved true the moment they arrived in Djerba where they had a lay-over in a big 
hotel sprawling with German tourists who could not find their rooms, while production was 
to wake up at 6 a.m. for a long drive to Tozeur. The trip itself was also taxing for the 
drivers because it was difficult to see the dark-clothed native Berber people while 
driving in the night. In Tozeur they ran into their next problem: the big hotel of the 
city was closed for renovations and the cast and crew for the 12-hour long miniseries 
Jesus of Nazareth had booked the best alternative hotels, as well as most of the local 
technicians and rental cars. Cast and crew ended up in fourth-rate hotels, sometimes 
doubled or even tripled up in rooms. Producer Gary Kurtz would say later of this: “That 
was okay for two weeks. We could survive that. But if it had been two or three months, we 
would have had a riot on our hands.”

March 22, 1976 – For this first day of shooting the following scenes where planned to be 
shot: parts from the scene where the droids Artoo and Threepio are being purchased, as well 
as parts for Luke watching the twin suns scene and the scene where Threepio and Luke rush 
out of the homestead to look for the escaped Artoo. The scenes were all shot around the set 
of the igloo and the treadmill wheels of the sandcrawler that was build earlier on the salt 
lake of Chott el Jerid, near Nefta. The call to begin was at 6:30 a.m., which was way too 
early for Anthony Daniels because he had slept terribly again after not getting much sleep 
in Djerba, and the two hours it took to put his costume on did not help with his mood, 
either. Still, like a professional, he soldiered on despite the costume being too much of a 
tight fit, hurting the actor whenever he had to move. Mark Hamill, on the other hand, quite 
enjoyed the first day as Luke Skywalker.

The rush to get started with shooting the movie proved to cause even more problems on this 
day, especially with the astromech droids. The production found out that the batteries they 
had put in them were too quick to deplete and not easy to replace, and that Artoo’s middle 
leg would not come out — whatever they tried. Another problem was that the droids would not 
always respond to their remote controls, causing them to go everywhere and not stop when 
they had to. A special problem case also was R5-D4, the red droid that Luke almost bought 
instead of Artoo. The crew had discovered that the exploding head was also where the parts 
were located to make him move, so they could not blow the head up. Still calm on the first 
day, Lucas and his team found creative ways around this, like pulling R5-D4’s backup droid 
on a rope so that they did not need him to move anymore, and Lucas knew that he would be 
able to use lots of smaller cuts in the movie to mask whenever a droid started to do 
something that it was not supposed to do.

They ended the day at 7:20 p.m., after shooting the night scene where Luke and Threepio are 
trying to find the escaped Artoo. Due to poor weather conditions the scene with Luke watching 
at the twin suns setting was scrapped and would eventually be filmed on March 29. The poor 
weather conditions on this first day would be a prelude to the big storm that would plague 
the production later, along with more accidents and problems that caused George Lucas to 
step down from directing for the next two movies.
